---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: The First Exercise
description: Install a software-based modular synthesizer and make a sound.
date: 2021-12-01
---
The first project is to download and install software modular synthesizer, then verify that sound can be heard.

While the task sounds fairly straight forward, this establishes a baseline from which all other exercises derives from and allows everyone to participate with the same tooling.

WHile there are multiple options available, there are two no-cost software modular synthesizers that I would like to highlight, each with their own unique ecosystem of users and support.

* [VCV Rack 2 Free](https://vcvrack.com/) is a no-cost open-source modular synthesizer. There is a Rack 2 Pro version; its use is not required for this course.
* [Voltage Modular Nucleus](https://store.cherryaudio.com/bundles/voltage-modular-nucleus) is a no-cost closed-source modular synthesizer. There are paid versions with a much greater number of modules; their use is not required for this course.

Both tools have similar capabilities, labeling and interfaces, but has distinct differences in mission and design. I highly recommend trying both.

This course will focus on the use of VCV Rack 2, but will attempt to support both equally.

1. Download VCV Rack 2 Free - [vcvrack.com/Rack](https://vcvrack.com/Rack)
2. Install it - [vcvrack.com/manual/Installing](https://vcvrack.com/manual/Installing)
3. Open it
4. Find the "AUDIO" module (upper-right corner)
5. Choose an audio driver (default will probably be fine) and device (specific to your computer).
6. Press `Z` on your keyboard; a note should be heard.
7. Press (in order) `ZSXDCVGBHNJM,`; a chromatic scale should be heard.